
.. raw:: html

   <div class="alert alert-block alert-info" style="margin-top: 20px">

.. raw:: html

   <h1 align="center">

Numpy in Python

.. raw:: html

   </h1>

.. code:: python

    import time 
    import sys
    import numpy as np 
    
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    %matplotlib inline  

.. code:: python

    def Plotvec1(u,z,v):
        #this function is used in code 
        ax = plt.axes()
        ax.arrow(0, 0, *u, head_width=0.05,color ='r', head_length=0.1)
        plt.text(*(u+0.1), 'u')
        
        ax.arrow(0, 0, *v, head_width=0.05,color ='b', head_length=0.1)
        plt.text(*(v+0.1), 'v')
        ax.arrow(0, 0, *z, head_width=0.05, head_length=0.1)
        plt.text(*(z+0.1), 'z')
        plt.ylim(-2,2)
        plt.xlim(-2,2)
    
    
    
    def Plotvec2(a,b):
        #this function is used in code 
        ax = plt.axes()
        ax.arrow(0, 0, *a, head_width=0.05,color ='r', head_length=0.1)
        plt.text(*(a+0.1), 'a')
        ax.arrow(0, 0, *b, head_width=0.05,color ='b', head_length=0.1)
        plt.text(*(b+0.1), 'b')
    
        plt.ylim(-2,2)
        plt.xlim(-2,2)

If you recall, a Python list is a container that allows you to store and
access data. We can create a Python List as follows:

.. code:: python

    a=["0",1,"two","3",4]

We can access the data via an index:



We can access each element using a square bracket as follows:

.. code:: python

    print("a[0]:",a[0])
    print("a[1]:",a[1])
    print("a[2]:",a[2])
    print("a[3]:",a[3])
    print("a[4]:",a[4])

A numpy array is similar to a list, it's usually fixed in size and each
element is of the same type. We can cast a list to a numpy array by
first importing numpy:

.. code:: python

    import numpy as np 

We then cast the list as follows:

.. code:: python

    a=np.array([0,1,2,3, 4])
    a

Each element is of the same type, in this case integers:



As with lists, we can access each element via a square bracket:

.. code:: python

    print("a[0]:",a[0])
    print("a[1]:",a[1])
    print("a[2]:",a[2])
    print("a[3]:",a[3])
    print("a[4]:",a[4])

The value of “a” is stored a follows:

.. code:: python

    a

If we check the type of the array we get "numpy.ndarray":

.. code:: python

    type(a)

As numpy arrays contain data of the same type, we can use the attribute
"dtype" to obtain the Data-type of the array’s elements. In this case a
64-bit integer:

.. code:: python

    a.dtype

We can create a numpy array with real numbers:

.. code:: python

    b=np.array([3.1,11.02,6.2, 213.2,5.2])

When we check the type of the array we get "numpy.ndarray":

.. code:: python

    type(b)

If we examine the attribute "dtype" we see float 64, as the elements are
not integers:

.. code:: python

    b.dtype

We can change the value of the array, consider the array "c":

.. code:: python

    c=np.array([20,1,2,3,4])
    c

We can change the first element of the array to 100 as follows:

.. code:: python

    c[0]=100
    c

We can change the 5th element of the array as follows:

.. code:: python

    c[4]=0
    c

Like lists, we can slice the numpy array, and we can select the elements
from 1 to 3 and assign it to a new numpy array 'd' as follows:

.. code:: python

    d=c[1:4]
    d

We can assign the corresponding indexes to new values as follows:

.. code:: python

    c[3:5]=300,400
    c

Similarly, we can use a list to select a specific index. The list '
select ' contains several values:

.. code:: python

    select=[0,2,3]

We can use the list as an argument in the brackets. The output is the
elements corresponding to the particular index:

.. code:: python

    d=c[select]
    d

We can assign the specified elements to a new value. For example, we can
assign the values to 100 000 as follows:

.. code:: python

    c[select]=100000
    c

Let's review some basic array attributes using the array ‘a’:

.. code:: python

    a=np.array([0,1,2,3, 4])
    a

The attribute size is the Number of elements in the array:

.. code:: python

    a.size

The next two attributes will make more sense when we get to higher
dimensions but let's review them. The attribute “ndim” represents the
Number of array dimensions or the rank of the array, in this case, one:

.. code:: python

    a.ndim

The attribute “shape” is a tuple of integers indicating the size of the
array in each dimension:

.. code:: python

    a.shape

.. code:: python

    a=np.array([1,-1,1,-1])

.. code:: python

    mean=a.mean()
    mean

.. code:: python

    standard_deviation=a.std()
    standard_deviation

.. code:: python

    b=np.array([1,2,3,4,5])
    b

.. code:: python

    max_b=b.max()

.. code:: python

    max_b=b.min()

Array Addition
--------------

Consider the numpy array 'u':

.. code:: python

    u=np.array([1,0])
    u

Consider the numpy array 'v':

.. code:: python

    v=np.array([0,1])
    v

We can add the two arrays and assign it to z:

.. code:: python

    z=u+v
    z

The operation is equivalent to vector addition:

.. code:: python

    Plotvec1(u,z,v)

Implement the following vector subtraction in numpy: u-v
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


.. raw:: html

   <div align="right">

Click here for the solution

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="1" class="collapse">

::

    u-v

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Consider the vector numpy array 'y':

.. code:: python

    y=np.array([1,2])
    y

We can multiply every element in the array by 2:

.. code:: python

    z=2*y
    z

This is equivalent to multiplying a vector by a scaler:

Multiply the numpy array z with -2:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


.. raw:: html

   <div align="right">

Click here for the solution

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="2" class="collapse">

::

    -2*z

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Product of two numpy arrays
---------------------------

Consider the following array 'u':

.. code:: python

    u=np.array([1,2])
    u

Consider the following array 'v':

.. code:: python

    v=np.array([3,2])
    v

The product of the two numpy arrays 'u' and 'v' is given by:

.. code:: python

    z=u*v
    z

Consider the list [1,2,3,4,5] and [1,0,1,0,1], and cast both lists to a numpy array then multiply them together:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


.. raw:: html

   <div align="right">

Click here for the solution

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="3" class="collapse">

::

    a=np.array([1,2,3,4,5])
    b=np.array([1,0,1,0,1])
    a*b

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Dot Product
^^^^^^^^^^^

The dot product of the two numpy arrays 'u' and 'v' is given by:

.. code:: python

    np.dot(u,v)

Convert the list [-1,1] and [1,1] to numpy arrays 'a' and 'b'. Then, plot the arrays as vectors using the fuction Plotvec2 and find the dot product:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


.. raw:: html

   <div align="right">

Click here for the solution

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="4" class="collapse">

::

    a=np.array([-1,1])
    b=np.array([1,1])
    Plotvec2(a,b)
    print("the dot product is",np.dot(a,b) )

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Convert the list [1,0] and [0,1] to numpy arrays 'a' and 'b'. Then, plot the arrays as vectors using the function Plotvec2 and find the dot product:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


.. raw:: html

   <div align="right">

Click here for the solution

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="5" class="collapse">

::

    a=np.array([1,0])
    b=np.array([0,1])
    Plotvec2(a,b)
    print("the dot product is",np.dot(a,b) )

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Convert the list [1,1] and [0,1] to numpy arrays 'a' and 'b'. Then plot the arrays as vectors using the fuction Plotvec2 and find the dot product:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


.. raw:: html

   <div align="right">

Click here for the solution

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="6" class="collapse">

::

    a=np.array([1,1])
    b=np.array([0,1])
    Plotvec2(a,b)
    print("the dot product is",np.dot(a,b) )
    print("the dot product is",np.dot(a,b) )

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Why is the result of the dot product for question 4 and 5 zero, but not zero for question 6? Hint: study the corresponding figures, pay attention to the direction the arrows are pointing to.
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


.. raw:: html

   <div align="right">

Click here for the solution

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="7" class="collapse">

::

    The vectors used for question 4 and 5 are perpendicular. As a result, the dot product is zero.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Adding Constant to a numpy Array
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Consider the following array:

.. code:: python

    u=np.array([1,2,3,-1]) 
    u

Adding the constant 1 to the array adds 1 to each element in the array:

.. code:: python

    u+1

The process is summarised in the following animation:



This part of Broadcasting check out the link for more detail.

Mathematical Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We can access the value of pie in numpy as follows :

.. code:: python

    np.pi

We can create the following numpy array in Radians:

.. code:: python

    x=np.array([0,np.pi/2 , np.pi] )

We can apply the function "sine" to the array 'x' and assign the values
to the array 'y'; this applies the sine function to each element in the
array:

.. code:: python

    y=np.sin(x)
    y

Linspace
^^^^^^^^

A useful function for plotting mathematical functions is "linespace".
Linespace returns evenly spaced numbers over a specified interval. We
specify the starting point of the sequence and the ending point of the
sequence. The parameter "num" indicates the Number of samples to
generate, in this case 5:

.. code:: python

    np.linspace(-2,2,num=5)

If we change the parameter **num** to 9, we get 9 evenly spaced numbers
over the interval from -2 to 2:

.. code:: python

    np.linspace(-2,2,num=9)

We can use the function line space to generate 100 evenly spaced samples
from the interval 0 to 2 pi:

.. code:: python

    x=np.linspace(0,2*np.pi,num=100)


We can apply the sine function to each element in the array 'x' and
assign it to the array 'y':

.. code:: python

    y=np.sin(x)

.. code:: python

    plt.plot(x,y)

Enjoying Python? Think ahead about what you might want to use in the future.
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you're looking for an enterprise-ready environment to use Python on a
big scale with two free Apache Spark executors, consider signing up for
a free account on `Data Science
Experience <http://cocl.us/NotebooksPython101bottom>`__

About the Authors:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

`Joseph
Santarcangelo <https://www.linkedin.com/in/joseph-s-50398b136/>`__ has a
PhD in Electrical Engineering, his research focused on using machine
learning, signal processing, and computer vision to determine how videos
impact human cognition. Joseph has been working for IBM since he
completed his PhD.

Copyright © 2017 `cognitiveclass.ai <https:cognitiveclass.ai>`__. This
notebook and its source code are released under the terms of the `MIT
License <cognitiveclass.ai>`__.

